Merging LES Model of MCRE Loop (#811)
idaholab/virtual_test_bed: doc/content/msr/lotus/lotus_cfd_model.md

# LMCR Primary Loop nekRS LES Model

*Contact: Jun Fang, fangj.at.anl.gov*

> *Model link: [LMCR nekRS LES Model](https://github.com/idaholab/virtual_test_bed/tree/mcre/msr/lotus/les)*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Model link: [LMCR nekRS LES Model](https://github.com/idaholab/virtual_test_bed/tree/devel/msr/lotus/les)*
```

!tag name=LMCR Primary Loop nekRS LES Model
     description=High-fidelity large-eddy simulation model of the LMCR primary loop using nekRS
     image=https://github.com/idaholab/virtual_test_bed/tree/mcre/doc/content/media/msr/lotus/les/mean_Umag.png
     pairs=reactor_type:MSR

>                        reactor:LMCR

Reviewer: is that acronym really used? I m thinking either LOTUS_MSR or generic_MCR ?

                       geometry:primary_loop
                       simulation_type:CFD
                       codes_used:NekRS
                       open_source:fully
                       V_and_V:demonstration
                       computing_needs:HPC
                       fiscal_year:2024
                       sponsor:NEAMS
                       institution:ANL

!alert note

> The CFD solver nekRS is not included in the VTB CI test suites yet. Users are encouraged to reach out to the nekRS developer team at Argonne by emailing the POC (Jun Fang at [fangj@anl.gov](mailto:fangj@anl.gov)). Additionally, a beta version of the nekRS tutorial is available at the [nekRS Documentation](https://nekrs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The CFD solver nekRS is not included in the VTB continuous integration test suite at this time. Users are encouraged to reach out to the nekRS developer team at Argonne by emailing the POC (Jun Fang at [fangj@anl.gov](mailto:fangj@anl.gov)). Additionally, a beta version of the nekRS tutorial is available at the [nekRS Documentation](https://nekrs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html).
```

## Model Overview

The LOTUS Molten Chloride Reactor (LMCR) is an open-core, fast-spectrum, liquid-fueled molten salt reactor concept that circulates chloride fuel salt through the reactor vessel and primary loop. The fuel salt, represented here by a UCl$_3$-NaCl eutectic mixture, provides both the fissile material and the primary heat-transfer medium [!citep](MCRreport2022,M3mcr2023). The high-fidelity computational fluid dynamics (CFD) model documented on this page represents an MCRE-like LMCR primary-loop configuration in which the unmoderated core cavity is connected to a curved inlet pipe, outlet pipe, pump region, and heat-exchanger leg. The checked-in nekRS case name is `mcre`, so the run files retain that historical name even though this VTB page documents the LMCR primary-loop LES benchmark.

> Because fission energy is deposited directly into the circulating fuel, the flow field controls more than pressure drop and heat removal. It also affects delayed neutron precursor residence time, spatial reactivity feedback, and the temperature field seen by lower-fidelity multiphysics models. The open core cavity does not contain internal structures that would homogenize the incoming jet. As a result, centrifugal acceleration from the upstream elbow drives the inlet stream toward the vessel wall, producing strongly three-dimensional recirculation, large coherent eddies, and persistent short-circuiting paths between the inlet and outlet.

Reviewer: you're missing the component (some sort of grid? @freiler or @tanoret) at the bottom trying to even the flow though

Reviewer: I dont think we have it in the VTB pgh model either

This nekRS model is intended to generate high-resolution large-eddy simulation (LES) data for understanding the LMCR primary-loop hydrodynamics and for calibrating engineering-scale thermal-hydraulic tools such as Pronghorn. The current checked-in case solves the incompressible isothermal flow problem with the temperature equation disabled, so the documented fields focus on velocity magnitude and the vertical velocity component. Accordingly, this study is centered on the loop flow velocity distribution and its turbulence characteristics.

!alert note

> The case files are stored in `msr/lotus/les`. The checked-in `mcre.par` file is a demonstration template. To speed up start-up and develop the turbulent state more quickly, begin runs with a lower polynomial order (for example $P=3$ or $P=5$) and a reduced Reynolds number. After the transient has developed, set the nondimensional viscosity to `1/10742.82` and restart at a higher polynomial order (for example $P=7$) to run the long averaging production calculation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The case files are stored in `msr/lotus/les`. The checked-in `mcre.par` file is a demonstration template. To speed up start-up and develop the turbulent state more quickly, you should begin runs with a lower polynomial order (for example $P=3$ or $P=5$) and a reduced Reynolds number. After the transient has developed, set the non-dimensional viscosity to `1/10742.82` and restart at a higher polynomial order (for example $P=7$) to run the long-averaging production calculation.
```
or longer averaging-production?

The LES model uses the incompressible, constant-property form of the Navier-Stokes equations:

\begin{equation}
\frac{\partial u_i}{\partial x_i} = 0,
\end{equation}

\begin{equation}
\frac{\partial u_i}{\partial t} + \frac{\partial}{\partial x_j}(u_i u_j)
= -\frac{1}{\rho}\frac{\partial p}{\partial x_i}
+ \frac{\partial}{\partial x_j}\left[\nu\left(\frac{\partial u_i}{\partial x_j}
+ \frac{\partial u_j}{\partial x_i}\right)\right] + f_i,
\end{equation}

where $u_i$ is velocity, $p$ is pressure, $\nu$ is kinematic viscosity, and $f_i$ is the user-defined momentum source used to drive the loop. The checked-in case disables the scalar temperature solve because this stage of the benchmark is focused on hydrodynamic mixing, residence-time behavior, and velocity-field statistics.

> The high-fidelity workflow uses lower-order transients to develop a turbulent initial condition before restarting at higher polynomial order for the production averaging run. In the documented analysis, initial transients were developed with $P=5$, while the final LES statistics targeting $Re \approx 10{,}742$ used $P=7$ for improved turbulent-scale resolution. 

Reviewer: production averaging is LES-talk btw. Might be friendlier to define it?

3. **Three-dimensional recirculation:** The combination of strong inlet curvature, expansion into an open vessel, and outlet suction generates a mean flow that cannot be adequately represented by a one-dimensional loop model or by an axisymmetric approximation.

## Implications for Lower-Fidelity Model Calibration

The LES data provide a reference for calibrating RANS and coarse-mesh system models used in longer reactor transients. In particular, this high-fidelity model can support:

- tuning of turbulent viscosity or turbulent kinetic energy limiters in stagnation and reattachment regions;
- selection of mixing-length scales that preserve the observed large coherent structures rather than overdamping them;
- assessment of wall-function behavior in regions of jet impingement, curvature-driven separation, and recirculation;
- residence-time-distribution estimates for delayed neutron precursor transport in liquid-fueled MSR multiphysics simulations;
- evaluation of whether porous-resistance or momentum-source surrogates in lower-fidelity tools reproduce the LES mean flow split and short-circuiting path.

## Running the Case

> A typical nekRS workflow is to compile the case, run a lower-cost transient to establish a turbulent state, and then restart at the production polynomial order for time averaging. The exact module names and executable paths depend on the target machine, but the following commands illustrate the expected sequence from the `msr/lotus/les` directory:

Reviewer: you don't explain how to restart?
